[MUSIC]
>>LISA GARR: Hi, I'm Lisa Garr,
host of "Gaiam Inspirations."
And we are coming to you
live from the Gaiam Studios
here in Boulder, Colorado.
And I encourage you-- this
is an interactive live show.
So please, communicate
with us and connect with us
on Facebook and Twitter.
We'd love to hear
with you-- hear
from you throughout the show.
So today we're talking
about self help.
And we talk a lot on the
show about self help.
But today is a little bit
of a difference slant.
We're talking more about
the kind of self help
that's not so much
self, but more help.
The kind of self
help that combines
social and personal
transformation, that
creates systems for change
in our personal lives
as well as in our world.
And joining me is Riane Eisler.
She is a pioneer in the
study of complex systems.
She is a futurist, an activist.
And she is a cultural historian.
She's been recognized as
one of the top 20 macro
historians in the world.
She's written about new systems
for change in her iconic books,
"The Challenge and the
Blade" and "The Real
Wealth of Nations."
Welcome to the show, Riane.
Thank you for joining me.
>>RIANE EISLER: It's a great
pleasure to be with you, Lisa.
>>LISA: It's a wonderful
honor to have you here.
>>EISLER: Thank you.
>>LISA: So I want you
to start, if you could,
sharing your-- a little
bit of your story, which
is so immense.
And it really shaped who you
are now, about you growing up.
>>EISLER: Well you
started, really,
by saying something
that is something
we had better pay attention
to-- that we can't really
separate our own
personal well being
from the society
in which we are.
And I learned that rather
traumatically very early
in my life.
Because I was born in Europe
at the time of the rise
to power of the Nazis, first in
Germany and then in my native
Austria.
So that from one day to
the next, we really--
I mean there was
always anti-Semitism.
But at that point,
we really became
hunted, with license to kill.
And I was a very little girl
when a gang of Gestapo men
stormed into our house,
dragged my father off.
And I saw two things there.
One of course, I
saw the cruelty.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>EISLER: And the violence.
>>LISA: As a small child,
that's a lot to handle.
>>EISLER: But I also
saw in my mother
what I today call
spiritual courage.
You know, we're told that
courage is the courage
to slay the enemy,
kill the dragon.
But she displayed what I
today call spiritual courage--
the courage to stand up
against injustice out of love.
She recognized
one of the men who
came as a young man who had been
an errand boy for the family
business.
And she got furious.
She said, how dare you
do this to this man who
was so good to you.
I want him back.
Now she could have been killed.
Many people were
killed that night.
But by a miracle she wasn't.
By a miracle she managed
to get my father back.
And by a miracle we
escaped at night.
>>LISA: All of
that is a miracle.
I mean, when you were looking
at your mother in that moment,
of her pleading for
her husband back,
did that imprint on
you at that moment,
that she was courageous?
>>EISLER: I think that
when we're children
we don't put it into
words, when we're little.
Our brains really
don't process that way.
>>LISA: But that
feeling came through.
>>EISLER: Yes, that
And I think-- I've
been told that that's
what my work is really about.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>EISLER: Standing up against
injustice out of love.
But those experiences
really led me to questions
about does it have
to be this way?
Because we've all
asked these questions.
And I try to answer them
using the conventional studies
and all the
university education.
And I couldn't.
And eventually, it
was these questions,
whether there are
alternatives to this,
that animated my
research that I've now
been doing for several decades.
>>LISA: Well, you have done
so much for women's rights.
You have done so much to raise
awareness for equal rights
and for-- to expose the
dominator versus partnership
model.
But in a way that,
you said, that's
very, very, very
important for me-- and I
have a very strong listening
for-- you do it out of love.
You do it in a way that is
easy for us to understand.
You do it in a way that
does not exclude people,
but includes everyone
in the conversation.
And that is the example of what
you teach, which is beautiful.
So fast forward.
Now you are a young mother,
and you're raising children,
and you're a single mom, and
you're working very, very hard.
And you somehow had to bring
that courage again, once again,
to raise young children as
a single working mother.
>>EISLER: Well, I have had
many turning points in my life.
And at one point, I quit my
marriage, my job, and smoking
in a period of three months.
I mean, I was done.
>>LISA: Oh, my goodness.
>>EISLER: Yeah.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>LISA: And really, I was
at that time just rebelling.
I really didn't know
where I was going.
>>LISA: Against what?
>>EISLER: Against
the whole thing,
that I was supposed to be the
little woman behind the man,
that I couldn't express myself.
But I was also rebelling in a
sense against all the injustice
that I saw.
I mean, I had a job
in Beverly Hills.
You know, I mean--
>>LISA: You were an attorney.
>>EISLER: Yes, I
was an attorney.
I'd gone to UCLA Law School.
And aside from my training
as a systems scientist
and a social scientist,
I was an attorney.
And really, I started to
understand something else
at that point, which
is that as much
as having been born Jewish--
well it had almost cost me
my life, that's how much it
affected me-- having been born
female had impacted my
life choices just as much.
And I-- it was
interesting because it
was at a time of
consciousness raising
when the women's liberation
movement got going.
And I realized that
so many problems
that I thought were my
own personal problems
were actually social problems
because I shared them
with so many women.
>>LISA: Such as?
>>EISLER: Well, I
was always being
told something is wrong with
me because I wanted something
more.
>>LISA: Mm hmm.
>>EISLER: I mean, in those
days you went to a party,
and people would ask
you what do you do?
And we would say,
I'm just a housewife.
Well today, I realize
that being a homemaker
is probably the
most important job.
But it's something
that both men and women
should do, the caring work,
the caring for children.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>EISLER: The keeping of a
clean and healthy environment.
The caring for the elderly.
That this is something that
should not be devalued.
>>LISA: Yes.
Or just held by the
responsibility of women.
>>EISLER: Yeah.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>EISLER: But it was
very interesting.
I was very stressed because
I was doing everything.
I was teaching at UCLA.
I was lecturing.
I was working as an attorney.
I had my two little girls.
And I got very sick.
Both my parents
died very suddenly.
And I think that was
sort of like it--
>>LISA: Oh, goodness.
>>EISLER: --for me.
And at that point, I
kind of had to decide
what am I going to do?
>>LISA: But that-- just,
why do women put themselves
in that situation, Riane, where
we have to be the martyrs?
Where we have to be
everything to everyone?
What is it about social
and cultural issues
that make some women-- and I'm
speaking in stereotypes as well
here-- think that we have to
be everything to everyone?
>>EISLER: Well, it's
our socialization.
We're socialized-- we
have been socialized
to focus on relationships.
As a daughter first, then as
a wife, and then as a mother--
always in relation to a man.
Rather than really
thinking of ourselves
as autonomous human beings.
And what I wanted to tell you
is, at that point in my life,
I realized that
what I wanted to do
was to get back to the
questions of my childhood.
And so I started this research.
And I took a big gamble.
And it was 10 years of
research for "The Chalice
and the Blade."
>>LISA: Ah.
>>EISLER: Multi-disciplinary,
cross-cultural.
And that's when I came out with
a really-- sort of thinking
outside the box, to use the
cliche-- understanding that
to move forward, we have to
get out of the old thinking.
You know, Einstein said
you can't solve problems
with the same thinking
that created them.
And I was still trying to
figure out right/left, religious
or secular, Eastern or Western.
>>LISA: Competition, division.
>>EISLER: Yeah.
None of these-- but
it wasn't just that.
It was like all of these
categories that do not
take into account the relations
without which we would not
be here.
The relations between the female
and male half of humanity,
and between them and
their daughters and sons.
And it was really-- people
tell me they read my work,
and it's like an aha--
ton of aha moments.
>>LISA: It is.
>>EISLER: So it was
for me in my research.
Because I suddenly
realized these
are the foundational relations.
Neuroscience tells us that
what children experience
and what they observe,
which are really,
when they're little--
shapes everything, including
even how their brains develop.
And how what we think
is normal or abnormal,
possible or impossible,
and moral or immoral,
is shaped by that.
And if you have a way
of seeing the world
where one half of humanity is
ranked over the other half--
>>LISA: Right.
>>EISLER: --that's a
template for all rankings,
be it not just man over
woman, but man over man,
race over race,
religion over religion.
And it's not
coincidental, by the way,
that the people who want to push
us back to the so-called good
old days, when all women and
most men knew their place
in these rankings-- top-down--
>>LISA: Right.
>>EISLER: --rankings.
They always want to go back to a
quote traditional family, which
is a code word, isn't it, for a
rigidly male-dominated, highly
punitive family.
Which is training for what
I call a domination system.
>>LISA: Which we've
seen so much of.
We've seen in history, time
and over and over again
in our history.
But it's by understanding
that history
that we're able to then go
forward and create what you're
talking about, is partnership.
Is real social change.
Is changing the
environment completely.
>>EISLER: Right.
Because really, trying
to-- we hear so much
about healing ourselves.
And I wrote a book called
"The Power of Partnership."
But, all this self
help, if you really
don't look at the conditions
under which you live,
your society, your
economic system,
your educational
system, your religion,
your political
system, your media--
it's like trying to go
up on a down elevator.
>>LISA: You can't help yourself
at all in those environments.
>>EISLER: No.
Because I mean, that's why we
have so many self help books.
>>LISA: Because we're really
like fish swimming upstream.
It really can't be done
in that environment.
I understand.
>>EISLER: I mean, so, first
thing is awareness of this.
And the second thing is really
doing not only the self change,
which is very
important, but also
to work for that economic and
social and cultural change.
>>LISA: Well, there's
a clip that we
have that was done
with the DVD that you
did called
"Tomorrow's Children."
And it's a clip that
explains the dominator
versus partnership model.
Take a look.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
-This distinction between
the partnership and dominator
models comes out of my
research over three decades,
multi-disciplinary
research looking
at a large span of our cultural
evolution that is reported
in part in my book "The
Chalice and the Blade."
This research addresses
fundamental questions
that many of us have asked,
questions that in my life
came out of my experiences as
a little girl in Nazi Austria.
Questions such as, do we have to
hunt and persecute each other?
When we humans have such an
enormous capacity for caring,
for creativity, what is it
that has tilted us back?
Don't we have any
alternatives to this way,
that is so often presented to
us as just the way things are?
Out of this research
the answer came.
Yes.
We do have alternatives.
But we cannot see these
alternatives unless we look
at human history
through a wider lens.
What we begin to see is that
societies-- whether they're
ancient or modern, Eastern
or Western-- that orient more
to the dominator model, we
see that the primary principle
for organizing
relations is ranking.
Man over woman.
Man over man.
Race over race.
Nation over nation.
Man over nature.
But as you move more towards
the partnership model,
you begin to see a different
governing principle: linking.
There are still hierarchies.
There are still very clear
lines of responsibility
and leadership.
But leadership is not
based on the power
to dominate, to control
through fear, through force.
It is not dis-empowering,
but empowering.
[END VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>LISA: And that's the beautiful
perspective that you have,
is that it is the
inclusion, again,
that were talking about earlier.
Some of our Facebook
questions are
coming in saying--
Mark is saying,
how do you mitigate
that domination culture
when you're raising
young children?
Great point.
And it's a dad asking.
>>EISLER: It's a
very important point.
And it's wonderful
that a dad is asking.
Because that takes us
to one of the movements
that we've seen
towards partnership,
which is the movement of
more men really raising
the children.
Because it used to be wait
til your father gets home.
Well, that's the
domination system.
>>LISA: Right.
>>EISLER: And it
robbed men, didn't it,
of that pleasure, those
endorphins-- you know,
these neurochemical
rewards of pleasure--
that we get for caring.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>EISLER: So thank you.
Thank you, Mark, for
asking that question.
And it's not an easy question
because there are resources out
there.
We, for example, at our
website, partnershipway.org,
have a wonderful
parenting guide based
on the latest neuroscience.
It's called "The Caring and
Connected Parenting Guide."
And I really highly
recommend that,
not only for you, but for
anybody that you know.
Because so much of
what we're trying to do
is to unlearn some
of the old patterns
and learn some of the new ones.
This said, there's
also the culture again.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>EISLER: What's going
to be taught in schools.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>EISLER: And again,
I wrote a book called
"Tomorrow's Children"
on education
for a partnership world.
>>LISA: Let's address
that for a second.
Because education in
the traditional sense
is very much of the
dominator model.
It is very much of the
top down, tier leveled,
you're on the top,
and then here's
the rest of us type of thing.
How do we change that?
And well, first of
all, let me ask you
about the history of it.
Where did it come from?
>>EISLER: Well, the
domination system, you mean?
Where did it come from?
>>LISA: In education
specifically.
>>EISLER: In education
Look, if you have a
domination system,
it happened when we
shifted to that system
during our prehistory, something
that I write about extensively
in both "The Chalice and the
Blade" and in "Sacred Pleasure"
and in other books.
But at that point, you have
to educate, socialize people
to fit into this system of top
down, rigid top down rankings.
If you look at the
European Middle Ages,
they looked like the Taliban,
you know, the Inquisition.
The Crusades.
The holy war, the jihad.
The witch burnings-- you
know, whether you slowly stone
a woman to death or
torture her by fire.
Women had no rights.
Children were supposed
to be seen, not heard.
>>LISA: Right.
>>EISLER: So were women,
as matter of fact--
and to look good while
they were being seen.
>>LISA: So that's
where our education
system was basically birthed.
>>EISLER: So, I mean, even
as late as the 17th and 18th
century, caning
children in school--
>>LISA: Right.
Of course.
>>EISLER: --was
still acceptable.
And we still have about 18
states in these United States
where paddling
children is legal.
Mostly southern.
Well, I'm afraid
to say that these
are the so-called red states.
But it's not because they're
red or purple or green,
it's because there
the domination model--
>>LISA: That's still existing.
>>EISLER: --is much stronger
than it is in other areas.
So that's really-- it's an
education appropriate for a--
what was then a monarchy,
a despotic regime.
I mean, today if you
read about the way
that boys are educated in
some Muslim fundamentalist
societies, again
it's a lot beating,
a lot of indoctrination.
And they also get
educated in their homes.
Because children get very
much punished, you know.
They learn that
you had better not
question authority,
no matter how unjust.
And they also get
this model of men
are supposed to dominate women.
Men are supposed to be served.
Well that gives you
a model, doesn't it,
for any out group, for any
difference being equated
with being served, or serving,
dominating or being dominated.
And if you only have those
two alternatives, you get war.
You get the war of the sexes.
So that's why we really need
to not only deconstruct and say
what's wrong-- and not just
rebuild, but reconstruct.
>>LISA: And reconstruct,
as you said, with heart.
Because you can't butt
up against a system
that's already a
dominated system.
So let's talk a
little bit about how
that relates to our economic
system, which is also
in that domination model
still very much so.
How would you attempt to
change, to really make
true social change in
our economic system?
>>EISLER: Well first
of all, I think
we have to leave aside
this old, dated argument
between capitalism
and socialism.
First of all, both
these theories
came out of industrial times.
And we're now in the
post-industrial knowledge
service era.
But also, both these
theories came out
of times that still oriented
much more to the domination
side of the continuum.
>>LISA: Right.
>>EISLER: So, if you
look at them-- See,
when I wrote "The Real
Wealth of Nations"
it was very clear,
again-- just as
right/left, religious/secular,
Eastern/Western
don't help us answer
what we need to do.
The same with socialism
and capitalism.
Because both do not
give visibility or value
to the most
important human work,
which is the work of
caring for people,
starting in early childhood,
and caring for nature.
The life sustaining activities.
And it's not in them.
So we have to move to a
whole new way of thinking,
one that recognizes that
the real wealth of a nation
consists of the contributions
of people and of nature.
And therefore we need
what we haven't had.
>>LISA: What specifically
are you talking about?
How do you specifically
suggest this?
>>EISLER: Well, we at the
Center for Partnership Studies
have a Caring Economy Campaign.
>>LISA: OK.
>>EISLER: And we have
a ton of materials.
We also have them on our
website partnershipway.org.
And we are soon to have
a new website called
"caringeconomy.com."
But one of our attempts is
to change the measurements.
How do we measure
economic health?
Because we know that what's
not measured is not counted.
>>LISA: OK.
>>EISLER: So we are saying what
many other people are saying--
but we take it to a different
and much more interesting
place-- that GDP is a lousy
measure of economic health.
I mean, think about
it for a moment.
It includes activities that
actually harm and take life.
>>LISA: And increase
the domination model.
>>EISLER: Well absolutely.
I mean, making cigarettes,
the medical bills,
the funeral bills--
they're great for GDP.
But not only does that supposed
measure of economic health,
which-- you know,
GDP keeps going up
while people lose their
jobs, their homes.
>>LISA: Right.
>>EISLER: I mean, there's
no connection here.
And one of the reasons is that
it doesn't take into account
the most important work, the
value of the work of caring
and caregiving for nature and--
>>LISA: For humans, in general.
>>EISLER: --for
humans and for nature.
And so we are working on
what we call "social wealth
indicators."
And we have a meeting in
Washington, DC of experts
to really see what-- look, our
nation, because we have really
been regressing more
to the domination side
in the last decades,
has the highest poverty
rate of children of
any developed nations.
We have the highest
infant mortality
rate of any developed nation.
We have the highest maternal
mortality rate of any nations.
That's being first
in the wrong things.
>>LISA: So, what you're
doing with your organization
is basically
creating-- and we have
a slide about this--
about Caring Economics.
Six Steps to Caring Economics.
Which is great,
because you make it
very easy for people
to understand.
And you also have a
Caring Economics Campaign.
Which is-- you are basically
growing leaders here
with this conversation.
You're teaching people
what real wealth means.
>>LISA: Well you
know, social change
takes place through
human agency.
And we can all be leaders.
This is no longer the age where
there's this one leader on top
and that's it.
>>LISA: That's whole
point, is that it's--
>>EISLER: That's
the whole point.
So our Caring Economy leadership
training is an online program.
You don't have to
leave your house.
leave your chair.
It's a nine-week program,
one and 1/2 hours a week.
Tremendous resources you'll get.
You get training.
You do a practicum.
And then you go
out, and you change
the conversation
about economics.
And you tell people
what they need to know.
>>LISA: Through
your organizations,
through your individual efforts,
through what it is that you do.
Yes.
>>EISLER: Absolutely.
>>LISA: Riane has done this
through all of her books
that she has written, through
each book has a through line.
It's a stepping stone
process of where
you have gone from politics
through sex through economics.
And you've covered all
the bases and looked
at the domination
versus partnership model
in each one of these sectors.
>>EISLER: I get a lot
of mail from people
who tell me that, really,
this way of looking
at the world, these books,
have changed their lives.
>>LISA: Oh yes.
>>EISLER: Have been
very empowering to them.
Because they connect the dots.
>>LISA: In a practical way.
>>EISLER: In a very
practical a way.
>>LISA: In a way
that gives us steps.
That gives us ways
to understand and how
to make this type of
change in our world.
And then of course, out of
a result of all of this,
you ask the question what kind
of world would our children
inherit?
And that is an absolute question
that comes out of all of this,
through education,
through everything
that we have discovered with
what you're talking about.
What type of world will our
children and our children's
children inherit?
>>EISLER: And that's
up to us today.
And we don't have
that much time,
because the mix of high
technology-- of high technology
in service of the once-hallowed
conquest of nature,
of high technology to
really exploit people more.
That is potentially take us
to an evolutionary dead end.
I mean nuclear weapons
and the domination system
are a potentially lethal mix.
>>LISA: Dead end, absolutely.
>>EISLER: So we've got
to really focus on that.
And I'm very
passionate about this
not only through my research
and writing and speaking
and activism, but as a
mother and a grandmother.
>>LISA: And as a
mother and grandmother,
you get to also see
what types of issues
and what type of images
the media shows us.
We're going to
take a quick break.
When we come back, we're going
to look at some of the media
images that we see
out there and how
they're affecting
gender equality.
We'll be right back.
You're watching
"Gaiam Inspirations."
I'm Lisa Garr.
We'll be right back.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>LISA: Welcome back to
"Gaiam Inspirations."
I'm Lisa Garr.
And my guest is Riane Eisler.
She is a social scientist
and an amazing woman.
We've been having a
great conversation
about gender and
gender equality.
Why is it so important to have
this conversation about gender?
>>EISLER: Well, we've
been taught, really,
that anything to do with gender
is just a women's issue, which
is kind of ridiculous because
we're half of humanity.
>>LISA: I'm glad you said that.
Yes.
>>EISLER: But the
reality is if you really
look at the whole of
a social system, which
is what my research does, we see
that how a society constructs
the roles and relations of
these two halves of humanity--
which is what women
and men are-- not only
affects directly our life
choices as women and men,
as girls and boys,
but that it affects
everything about the system.
Our beliefs.
What we are told is
valuable or not valuable.
All of our institutions,
from the family--
whether it's authoritarian more
democratic-- religion, media,
politics, and economics.
And in my last book, "The
Real Wealth of Nations,"
one of the things that comes
to the fore again and again
is that the reason, really the
underlying reason that there
always seems to be
enough money for prisons,
to punish, for wars,
and weapons to conquer--
>>LISA: It's never questioned.
>>EISLER: But there never seems
to be enough money for caring
for people, for health
care, for child care,
for paid parental leave-- is
because, in the domination
system, men are
ranked over women.
And anything
stereotypically considered
feminine, such as caring,
caregiving, nonviolence,
is also devalued, whether
it's in a woman or a man.
So men are wimps, they're
sissies, they're effeminate.
I mean, why should
effeminate be a pejorative?
And the thing is that unless
we see this hidden subtext
of gendered values, we
can't make sense of things.
I mean, the most
important investment
as we move into the
post-industrial knowledge
service economy is what
economists keep telling us.
It is what they like to call
high quality human capital--
flexible, creative people
who can solve problems.
That does not just
happen in universities.
We know from neuroscience
that the most important time
for that to either happen
or not as our brains develop
is in early childhood care.
So if we are really to do what
every other industrialized and
now post-industrial
nation is doing,
invest in paid parental leave
for both mothers and fathers.
Government funded.
Invest in high quality
early childhood education.
The return on investment, the
studies show, on this is 200%.
>>LISA: Return on investment
for any corporation that
supports that type
of child care.
>>EISLER: For any government
that supports that child care.
>>LISA: That's very interesting.
>>EISLER: And we're
today being told
that these are precisely
what we need to cut.
Well we will not be competitive.
We will not be competitive
in the new economy.
So this is not only a question
of doing what's right.
It's a question of not
committing economic suicide.
And that's really why we so need
what I call a Caring Economy.
>>LISA: Well, this--
actually, this next clip
shows the difference
between gender,
and how there is such a wide
gap where it comes to care,
when it comes to child care.
Take a look.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
- Re-examining and
changing the valuations,
the values that today
drive economic systems.
Now of course
economics really is
about what is or is not valued.
And classical economists
will tell you, yeah,
but that is determined
by supply and demand.
And that is part of it.
But much more important are
the underlying cultural values,
values that are so
unconsciously embedded
that we're often not
even aware of them.
Let me give you an example.
Professions that do not entail
caring and caregiving-- they
can be done by caring
people, but the work
is not caregiving work.
Engineering.
Plumbing.
They are much higher paid than
those professions that do,
such as child care,
elementary school teaching.
So in the United
States, people think
nothing of paying the plumber--
the person to whom we entrust
our pipes-- $50 to $100 an hour.
But the child care
worker-- the person
to whom we entrust our
children-- according
to the US Department of
Labor, gets an average
of less than $10 an
hour with no benefits.
And of course we
insist plumbers be
trained, but not that child
care workers be trained.
Now this is not logical.
It's actually pathological.
And we've got to change it.
[END VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>LISA: Yes.
We have to find a
way to change that.
And that is what you're
talking about today--
is finding ways to
change that into more
of an inclusive
partnership model.
One of the listeners
actually is asking--
this is a great question.
Jan from Facebook is
saying, "how do you
teach children to
deal with the images
on TV that are being given
of females on television?"
That's a good question.
>>EISLER: That's really
part of the regression
to the domination side of the
continuum that we're seeing it.
I mean, it's not new
to objectify women.
It goes way back.
I mean, you look at Greek
vases and et cetera.
But what is new is the
explicit sexuality.
Now there's nothing
wrong with sex.
I mean, I wrote a
whole book about that
called "Sacred Pleasure."
But it is really the erotization
of domination and violence
that's wrong with sex.
And that's our
dominator heritage.
I mean, one way of
really getting a hold
of people's-- because sex is a
very important part of life--
is to say sex is bad.
And women are temptresses.
And--
>>LISA: Right.
>>EISLER: --you
know, that thing.
But the other way is what we
see so much in the media today,
constant linking of sex with
domination and with violence
and with the
objectification of women
as just a sex object,
not a human being.
>>LISA: It does
seem like there's
a new line that has
been crossed, however,
that just keeps getting pushed.
I have a young
child, a young girl.
And I am trying
to figure out how
to teach her to handle those
images that are coming at her.
No matter-- there's no
shielding a child from that.
You drive to school, and
there's 37 billboards
of ladies that are--
barely have any clothes on.
>>EISLER: And that's a
complete objectification.
And it's totally unrealistic.
There's a wonderful
magazine for girls
that is published by a company
called-- it's called New Moon.
And it's written
and edited by girls.
And I highly recommend it.
I've given it always
to my granddaughters
and to other girls.
>>LISA: But what does it say?
What do I say to her?
>>EISLER: What do
you say to her?
You tell her that that
is a way that women
have been viewed
for a long time.
And that we really think
it's very unhealthy.
That you are much more
than your body parts.
Your body parts have
to be respected.
Whether somebody
sees them or not
is something that you
have to determine,
whether somebody touches them.
We need sex education.
>>LISA: Yes.
A lot more.
>>EISLER: A lot more.
>>LISA: Well, it's got
to start at home, really.
>>EISLER: It's got
to start at home.
>>LISA: Yeah.
It's not going to come
from an institution.
>>EISLER: No.
But we need to also have
it in the institutions.
Because not all parents are
able to really deal with it.
They'd rather have their kids
watch violence on television
than sex, which I think, I
mean, doesn't make much sense.
>>LISA: But it also has to do
with what you're talking about,
our social conditioning
around all of this.
Because this has now
become socially acceptable.
It's the norm.
It's the domination
model once again.
So how do we educate
ourselves in order
to educate our children?
>>EISLER: Well, we
educate ourselves
by looking at the
so-called sexual revolution
and understanding that there
were healthy parts to it.
The acceptance that sex is
a normal, pleasurable human
activity.
But then the part that was
tainted by our domination
heritage is this notion
that women are now
to be just available for men.
That that's how they
get their status.
That's how-- it's the old model.
>>LISA: It's going back to that.
>>EISLER: It's
going back to that.
And unfortunately, the
sexualization of little girls
has become a business.
>>LISA: Oh, yes, it has.
>>EISLER: Selling all of those
clothes and all of that stuff.
Indoctrinating them
before their brains
are formed so they have
any critical faculties.
So yes, we've got a job to do.
But I always want you to
understand something here.
And I think that's really
important for all of us
to understand.
There's always this tension
between the partnership
and domination trends.
And we can strengthen the
partnership ones, for example,
by using resources
like New Moon.
For example, by
insisting that there
be real sex education that
talks about caring commitment
in a sexual relationship,
that teaches
both boys and girls that it's
not-- instant gratification
is not what's going
to make a happy life.
>>LISA: In the long run.
I mean, if you tell
that to a young boy,
they will tell you
that it-- I mean,
the social conditioning
is appealing
to the rising hormones
in young boys.
>>EISLER: There's no question.
But the girls also have
those rising hormones.
>>LISA: And, I was just
about to say, and girls.
Yes.
>>EISLER: So.
But still.
>>LISA: So we have to teach
about the social conditioning,
more so.
>>EISLER: Absolutely.
I mean, is this really--
I mean, do you really
want that kind of a relationship
to both boys and girls?
>>LISA: It's interesting
because it's real.
It is what is happening.
It's what is all over our media.
And it's exactly
what we're seeing.
So it kind of leads us into
the conversation of the action
plans that you
have and that have
been created with
your organization.
As well as the Caring Economics,
there's six areas for action
that you propose.
What are they?
>>EISLER: Well, I think
the first thing, really,
is that we have
to re-examine what
is a healthy economic system,
to change the conversation.
And yes, to start talking
about a caring economy.
And people are going
to say, caring?!
I mean, that soft--
>>LISA: What is that?
>>EISLER: --that soft fuzzy
feminine stuff, you know.
They're going to say, well,
that's just not effective.
So the second thing is really to
show how very effective it is.
That companies that have
caring policies, companies
that are regularly in the
Fortune 500 or the Working
Mothers-- companies as the best
companies to work for-- that
have caring policies,
that they have
a substantially higher
return to investors.
And it makes sense.
If people and their
families feel cared for--
>>LISA: Yes.
>>EISLER: They're
going to work very
hard to make that
company successful.
>>LISA: And they'll
want to keep that job.
>>EISLER: And we
also have to look
at nations that have been highly
successful-- in human terms
and in economic
terms-- in many ways,
much more successful than
this very rich United States.
>>LISA: You explain the Nordic
nations are very supportive.
>>EISLER: Sweden, Finland,
Norway, Iceland, Denmark--
they all have more
caring policies.
And the thing-- They have paid
parental leave for both mothers
and fathers.
Universal health care.
They have high
quality child care.
Their kids, by the
way, score very high
in tests, international tests.
And they have low poverty
and low crime rates
and a generally high
standard of living.
Everything that we
are not seeing here.
And they invested in
caring for their people.
And we come back
to gender again,
which is another one
of these steps showing,
really, the gender connection.
It's only because the
status of women rose.
Because 40% of the national
legislature is female,
say in Sweden, Finland, Norway--
>>LISA: OK.
Which is very
different from here.
>>EISLER: --that not
only women, but also men
voted for more caring policies.
So they call themselves
caring societies.
>>LISA: You mentioned
that the females--
the mothers cannot get
the maternity leave unless
the fathers take
the paternity leave?
>>EISLER: In Sweden, if it's
a woman-man family, yes.
If the father doesn't take
it, then neither gets it.
>>LISA: That's interesting.
>>EISLER: Well, you see it
gives men the opportunity,
doesn't it, that we
spoke of earlier--
>>LISA: Yes.
>>EISLER: --to the man who asked
the question about the child--
>>LISA: Yes.
>>EISLER: --the father,
to really experience
that bonding, that pleasure.
Look, what we really want
for both women and men is
that we can each express
all of our potentials,
that women can be leaders.
That they can be
assertive and not
be called ball breakers,
or whatever, bitches.
>>LISA: Right.
Yes.
>>EISLER: And that men can
be caring and sensitive
and experience the joy of that.
>>LISA: Yes.
And we are establishing
new models all the time.
One of our listeners
here-- and I'm
encouraging your
questions via Facebook
and Twitter-- Lynn is asking--
she retired as a teacher.
And she's saying
because she was fed up
with the education system.
And she wants to know
how she can really
effect social change.
How can she?
>>EISLER: Well, first of
all, I don't blame her
for being fed up
with this teaching
to the test, which is really
a regression to the domination
system.
It's again the ranking.
Grading on tje curve
is the worst thing.
Somebody has to fail.
And somebody has to be on top,
no matter how good you are.
Somebody has to be on bottom.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>EISLER: And that takes
away from what really counts,
which is the teacher's
engagement with the child--
engaging, being partners--
>>LISA: Empowering.
>>EISLER: --with the child.
But how can she?
Social change doesn't
happen by Itself.
If you look at the European
Middle Ages, as I said,
they looked like the Taliban.
We moved, but it happened
through human agency.
And the first thing is
changing the conversation.
The old terms for the more
rigid domination system,
the ideals of fealty,
obedience-- right?
>>LISA: Yes.
>>EISLER: And then we started
to talk about equality,
about democracy.
>>LISA: Yes.
That's true.
>>EISLER: But we have to be very
careful, because like freedom.
Freedom is used by the
corporate interests that
don't want regulation as
freedom for those on top
to do whatever they want.
>>LISA: Right.
>>EISLER: And the same
thing in families.
You know, the family
is supposed to have
freedom from interference.
But what that really means
in a dominator family
is that kids can be abused.
Women can be abused.
And it's only as we move
to the partnership side
that you see the reporting
of spousal abuse.
Do you see what I'm saying?
It's not that
there's more of it.
It's that people are coming
out with it because we're
moving to the partnership side.
>>LISA: And we're also doing
that in an economics way.
There's an old economic
map and a new economic map
here, that your organization
also talks about.
>>EISLER: Well, that comes from
"The Real Wealth of Nations."
Because the old economic map
really only included the market
economy, the government economy,
and the illegal economy.
But it left out, as I said, when
we were talking about measures,
the three
life-sustaining sectors.
And we have got
to include those.
We have to have these social
wealth economic measurements.
And I really want to
invite our viewers
to become engaged in this, to
really take our Caring Economy
online leadership program.
Because as the
former teacher said,
how do we make
social change happen?
We can't just do it
by deconstruction.
We can't do it by
just rebelling.
We have to also show what
needs to be reconstructed.
>>LISA: So we have to move
from this domination model
more towards a
partnership model.
>>EISLER: Yes.
>>LISA: We have to
find a way where
we can create this social
and cultural transformation.
But we have to do it how?
Specifically how do we do this?
>>EISLER: Well, if you want
to change the economic system,
as I said, these are the steps
that we are talking about.
You have to start talking
about a caring economy.
And when people
do a double take,
you remind them that
that reaction really
shows how brainwashed
we've been,
to accept a system guided
by uncaring values.
So I mean, there are
some very specific steps.
Raising the status of women, as
you saw in the Nordic nations,
leads to more caring policies.
When you're dealing
with systems,
you have to connect the dots.
It's interactive.
It isn't just one thing.
So wherever you happen
to be-- but see,
the reason that these
Nordic nations moved more
to a caring economy is
because they moved more
from a domination to
a partnership system.
They have more
democracy and equality
in both the family
and the state.
They are trying to
leave behind what
keeps domination systems going.
Fear, force.
The first peace studies,
the first laws--
that it's illegal to use
physical punishment of children
in families.
Men's movement to
disentangle masculinity
from its association with
domination and violence.
And yes, a much more
equal partnership
between women and men.
And so, as the
status of women rose,
men no longer found it such
a threat to their status,
to their quote,
masculinity, to really
also embrace more caring values.
>>LISA: That is a great point.
I mean, can we
talk about the men?
Can we talk about the
fact that maybe they
don't want to bear all
that responsibility.
Maybe they want to
share the parenting
and be more part of
their children's lives.
Maybe they want to have
a dual-income family.
Maybe this is something
that is desired.
>>EISLER: Well, it's two ways.
We're always back to the
personal and the social.
>>LISA: Yes.
True.
Yes.
>>EISLER: Because
the only reason
that we are-- that more men
are doing the parenting,
the mothering-- is
>>LISA: Is because the
mothers are working.
>>EISLER: Well, no.
It's actually because
it's no longer such a--
>>LISA: Oh, unacceptable thing.
>>EISLER: --unacceptable
thing for a man
to do, to diaper a
baby or to feed a baby.
>>LISA: Right.
>>EISLER: You know, women
going into the workplace
has really, in many ways, been
a very important influence
in humanizing the workplace.
>>LISA: Explain that.
>>EISLER: Well, yes.
I mean, all the way from not
such austere surroundings
to the movement towards
child care, towards--
>>LISA: Partnership.
>>EISLER: Towards partnership.
And also the movement
towards, really,
more caring and
nurturing leadership
styles, which we are learning.
I teach leadership.
>>LISA: Thank goodness.
>>EISLER: The leader
that elicits from others
their highest
potentials-- what I
call in a hierarchy
of actualization
rather than domination--
gets the best results.
>>LISA: That's true.
>>EISLER: And so this movement
towards a more partnership
has a lot to do with the
changing of the gender roles
and relations.
>>LISA: Yes.
Absolutely.
When we talk about
a caring economy,
there's a clip that comes from
the DVD "Tomorrow's Children"
where Riane talks about--
specifically talks about what
a caring economy is.
Let's take a look.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
--Now, you've probably
noticed that just
hearing "caring" and "economics"
in the same sentence,
people tend to do a
double take, don't they?
But think about it.
Isn't that a terrible comment
on the uncaring values
we've learned to take
for granted as driving
economic systems?
We wouldn't have our
environmental, social,
and economic crises, global
warming, chronic hunger
and poverty, if we had more
caring economic systems.
But it is today more
urgent than ever
before that we shift to,
yes, to a caring economics.
Because we are in
the midst of a major,
major technological
and economic and social
shift-- the shift into the
post-industrial service
information economy.
A time of seismic
technological changes,
when manufacturing and other
jobs are being eliminated
by not just automation, but
at an ever more rapid clip
by robotics.
A time when
economists never tire
of telling us that the most
important capital-- yes, they
call it capital-- for a
successful post-industrial era
is what they call high
quality, human capital.
What is that?
That is flexible,
innovative, creative people,
people with highly
developed capacities.
But consider that
these capacities
aren't just developed in
universities, as important
as that is.
Whether or not these capacities
are or are not developed,
we now know-- not
only from psychology
but from neuroscience--
depends to a huge extent
on the quality of
care children receive.
So yes, this is the
time to move forward.
[END VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>EISLER: I want
to say something
very quickly about poverty.
Because the mass
of the world's poor
and the poorest of
the poor are women.
Women in this country
over the age of 65,
according to the US
Census, are twice as
likely to be poor as
men of the same age.
And that's not only
job discrimination,
that's because most of them
are or were either full or part
time caregivers.
And poverty is their reward.
If we're serious
about less poverty,
we have to move to a caring
economy that gives visibility
and real value to this
most essential human work.
>>LISA: I remember
you telling me
in one of the past--
the radio show
interviews I did with you
about Salary.com did a survey
and decided that the average
salary of a working mother
would be something
like $234,000 a year,
based on the amount of
hours they put in working
as a stay-at-home
mom, essentially.
>>EISLER: Well, we-
>>LISA: --as a mother.
>>EISLER: And yet economists
talk about stay-at-home mothers
and fathers as
economically unproductive.
>>LISA: Ugh.
>>EISLER: So we've got to change
the whole way of thinking.
What is really the-- One
of the pivotal questions
for this post-industrial
era, when
robotics as I said--
And by the way,
that clip is from our PowerPoint
for the Caring Economy
training, that people
get ahold of when
they take the online training.
>>LISA: So you can see
more of that there.
Great.
>>EISLER: Yeah.
So they get a whole
panoply of materials.
But I mean, the whole
point of it is, look.
It's caused a lot of
suffering in the past.
It will continue to
cause a lot of suffering.
But we're at a place where
we had better move there now.
>>LISA: Yes.
Actually, one of the
Facebook questions
that's coming in from
Tina is basically
saying that the domination model
has gotten so fierce right now.
Is this a last stand?
Is this something that
is maybe the end, because
of its fierceness,
at this point?
>>EISLER: Well, we would like to
think that, but I'm afraid not.
Because what we see
in modern history
is that, since moving
from the Middle Ages
to today, where we have much
more partnership elements,
is all the progressive
movements have
challenged traditions
of domination.
You know, divinely ordained
right of kings to rule.
Divinely ordained
right of men to rule
over women and children.
Divinely ordained right of
one race to rule another.
All the way to man's
once-hallowed conquest
of nature.
You know, the right
to exploit, et cetera.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>EISLER: But all
of this has been
more of a spiral upward
movement with dips.
And the only way
that we can be sure
that there won't be anymore dips
is if we build the foundations.
And the foundations
have to do with what
we've been talking about.
How are children brought up?
Is it in dominator or
partnership styles?
That's why the Caring
and Connected Parenting
Guide we have is so important.
What is the relationship between
the two halves of humanity,
that children observe, which
is a model for all relations?
>>LISA: Men and women.
>>EISLER: Men and women.
And some basics, like economics.
What do we reward?
What do we consider
valuable work?
>>LISA: And there's
actually a great clip
that you quote Margaret Mead.
And she offers a
wonderful suggestion
on how we could really create
change by working together.
Take a look at this.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
--I want to close
by reminding us
of something that
Margaret Mead pointed out.
That the only thing that ever
brought about positive change
is a group of dedicated
women and men.
So let's be that group of
dedicated women and men.
Let's join together to
really make that difference,
to send a steady stream of
pressure and information,
and yes, new thinking to our
policymakers, to our neighbors,
to our friends, to everyone
in our sphere of influence.
Let's do what we
need to do to move
to that economic system
that is so urgently needed
at this critical time
in human history.
An economic system that
gives visibility and value
to the most important human
work: the work of caring
for people starting in
childhood and caring
for our mother Earth.
So I invite you to
join me and the Center
for Partnership Studies in
this exciting and urgently
needed enterprise.
Let's do it.
Let's do it for ourselves,
for our children,
and for generations to come.
I thank you.
[END VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>LISA: You are so inspiring.
And you are so motivating.
And yet that message is
so clear and so poignant,
because there are things
that we actually can do.
And it's about a
caring economics.
It's, really, those two words
are beautifully put together.
They seem like
they're so opposite.
They're beautifully
put together.
>>EISLER: Let's imagine
what the world can be like
if we really have
a caring economy.
Because it's not possible,
really, to change things
unless we know what our goal is.
And it has to be specific.
It can't just be a better world,
and peace, and all of that.
It has to be how do we
change the rules of the game?
How do we change
the measurements
of what's economically valuable?
How do we really do this?
And we can do it.
We have all kinds of resources.
I invite our viewers to
come to our websites,
partnershipway.org--
>>LISA: Yes.
>>EISLER: --and
caringeconomy.com.
>>LISA: Thank you
so much, Riane.
You have been a pleasure.
And thank you so
much for watching.
If you'd like to watch
a replay of my interview
with Riane Eisler or share
it with your friends,
go GaiamTV.com.
And for more
thought-provoking interviews
and inspirational films and so
much more, go to GaiamTV.com.
And sign up for your
free trial today.
And until next time, I
invite you to stay inspired.
[MUSIC PLAYING]